



Network Working Group                                            E. Gray
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                                  J. Drake
Expires: August 23, 2020                                Juniper Networks
                                                                J. Arkko
                                                                Ericsson
                                                       February 20, 2020


                 Framework for Transport Network Slices
                     draft-ejj-teas-ns-framework-00

Abstract

   TBD

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 23, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Management systems or other applications  . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Expressing connectivity intents . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Controller  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.3.1.  Mapping to ACTN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.5.  Underlying technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   This draft provides a framework and architecture for discussing
   transport slices, multipoint-to-multipoint connections:

   "A transport slice is an abstract network topology connecting a
   number of endpoints, with expected objectives specified through a set
   of service level objectives (SLO)."

   This definition comes from [I-D.nsdt-teas-transport-slice-definition]
   (to be replaced by draft-rokui-teas-transport-slice-definition).  It
   is the intention in this document to use terminology consistent with
   this and other definitions provided in that draft.

   This framework is intended as a structure for discussing interfaces
   and technologies.  It is not intended to be a new set of concrete
   interfaces or technologies.  Rather, the idea is that existing or
   under-development IETF technologies (plural) can be used to realize
   the ideas expressed here.

   For example, virtual private networks (VPNs) have served the industry
   well as a means of providing different groups of users with logically
   isolated access to a common network.  The common or base network that
   is used to provide the VPNs is often referred to as an underlay
   network, and the VPN is often called an overlay network.  As an
   example technology, a VPN may in turn serve as an underlay network
   for transport slices.





Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   Note: It is conceivable that extensions to these IETF technologies
   are needed in order to fully support all the ideas that can be
   implemented with slices, but at least in the beginning there is no
   plan for the creation of new protocols or interfaces.

   Driven largely by needs surfacing from 5G, the concept of network
   slicing has gained traction ([NGMN-NS-Concept], [TS23501], [TS28530],
   and [BBF-SD406]).  In [TS23501], Network Slice is defined as "a
   logical network that provides specific network capabilities and
   network characteristics", and Network Slice Instance is defined as "A
   set of Network Function instances and the required resources (e.g.
   compute, storage and networking resources) which form a deployed
   Network Slice".  According to [TS28530], an end-to-end network slice
   consists of three major types of network segments: Radio Access
   Network (RAN), Transport Network (TN) and Core Network (CN).
   Transport network provides the required connectivity within and
   between RAN and CN portions, with a specific performance commitment.
   For each end-to-end network slice, the topology and performance
   requirement on transport network can be very different, which
   requires the transport network to have the capability of supporting
   multiple different transport slices.

   While network slices are commonly discussed in the context of 5G, it
   is important to note that transport slices are a narrower concept,
   and focus primarily on particular network connectivity aspects.
   Other systems, including 5G deployments, may use transport slices as
   a component to create entire systems and concatenated constructs that
   match their needs, including end-to-end connectivity.

   A transport slice is a virtual (logical) network with a particular
   network topology and a set of shared or dedicated network resources,
   which are used to provide the network slice consumer with the
   required connectivity, appropriate isolation and specific service
   level objectives (SLO).  A transport slice could span multiple
   technology and multiple administrative domains.  Depending on the
   consumer's requirements, a transport slice could be isolated from
   other, often concurrent transport slices in terms of data, control
   and management planes.

   Network abstraction is a technique that can be applied to a network
   domain to select network resources by policy to obtain a view of
   potential connectivity and a set of service functions.

   Transport network slicing builds on the concept of resource
   management, network virtualization and abstraction to provide
   performance assurance, flexibility, programmability and modularity.
   It might use techniques such as Software Defined Networking (SDN)
   [RFC7149] and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [RFC8172],



Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   [RFC8568] to create multiple logical (virtual) networks, each
   tailored for a set of services, a particular transport slice
   consumer, or a group of consumers that share the same (or closely
   similar) requirements, on top of a shared network.  How the network
   slices are engineered can be deployment-specific.

   Thus, there is a need to create virtual network structures with
   required characteristics.  The consumer of such a virtual network can
   require a degree of isolation and performance that previously might
   not have been satisfied by traditional overlay VPNs.  Additionally,
   the transport slice consumer might ask for some level of control to
   their virtual networks, e.g., to customize the service paths in a
   network slice.

   This document specifies a framework for the use of existing
   technologies as components to provide a transport slice service, and
   might also discuss (or reference) modified and potential new
   technologies, as they develop (such as [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn]).

2.  Requirements

   It is intended that transport slices can be created to meet specific
   requirements, typically expressed as bandwidth, latency, latency
   variation, and other desired or required characteristics.  Creation
   is initiated by a management system or other application used to
   specify network-related conditions for particular traffic flows.

   And it is intended that, once created, these slices can be monitored,
   modified, deleted, and otherwise managed.

   It is also intended that applications and components will be able to
   use these transport slices to move packets between the specified end-
   points in accordance with specified characteristics.

   As an example of additional requirements that might apply to
   transport slices, see [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn] (in particular,
   section 2).

3.  Framework

   A number of transport slice services will typically be provided over
   a shared underlying network infrastructure.  Each transport slice
   consists of both the overlay connectivity and a specific set of
   dedicated network resources and/or functions allocated in a shared
   underlay network to satisfy the needs of the transport slice
   consumer.  In at least some examples of underlying network
   technologies, the integration between the overlay and various




Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   underlay resources is needed to ensure the guaranteed performance
   requested for different transport slices.

   The users of transport slices are:

   o  The management system or other application that creates and
      manages them.

   o  The applications and components wishing to use these slices.

   These users are served by the system that can build transport slices,
   as follows:

   o  A controller takes requests from a management system or other
      application, which are then communicated via an abstracted
      northbound interface.  This interface transmits data objects that
      describe the needed transport slices in terms of service level
      objectives (SLO).

   o  These requests are assumed to be translated by one or more
      underlying systems, which establish specific transport slice
      instances, using specific implementation techniques (such as MPLS)
      implemented on top of the underlying network infrastructure.

   Section 3 of [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn] provides an example
   architecture that might apply in using the technology described in
   that document.

3.1.  Management systems or other applications

   The transport slice system is used by a management system or other
   application.  These systems and applications may also be a part of a
   higher level function in the system, e.g., putting together network
   functions, radio equipment, application specific components, as well
   as the transport slices.

3.2.  Expressing connectivity intents

   The northbound interface can be used to communicate betweern users
   and/or providers of the transport slices and the transport slice
   system controller.

3.3.  Controller

   The transport slice controller takes abstract requests for transport
   slices and implements them using a suitable underlying technology.





Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   [I-D.nsdt-teas-transport-slice-definition] (to be replaced by draft-
   rokui-teas-transport-slice-definition) define two new terms -
   Transport Slice Controller (TSC) and Transport Network Controller.
   The TSC realizes the transport slice in the network as well as
   maintains and monitors the transport slice.  The Transport Network
   Controller is traditional network infrastructure controller that
   offers network resources to TSC to be used for realization of a
   particular transport slice.

3.3.1.  Mapping to ACTN

   [RFC8453] defined three controllers as per the framework for
   Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN) to support virtual
   network (VN) services - Customer Network Controller (CNC), Multi-
   Domain Service Coordinator (MDSC) and Provisioning Network Controller
   (PNC).  A CNC is responsible for communicating a customer's virtual
   network requirements, a MDSC is responsible for multi-domain
   coordination, virtualization/abstraction, customer mapping/
   translation and virtual service coordination to realize the virtual
   network requirement.  Its key role is to detach the network/service
   requirements from the underlying technology.  A PNC oversees the
   configuration, monitoring and collection of the network topology.
   The PNC is a underlay technology specific controller.

   While the ACTN framework is a generic VN framework that is used for
   various VN service beyond the transport slice, it is still a suitable
   based to understand how the various controllers interact to realize
   the Transport slice.

   A mapping between the Transport Slice controller definitions and ACTN
   controllers is as shown below figure -




















Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   +------------------------------------+
   |             Customer               |
   +------------------------------------+
                     A
                     |
                     V
   +------------------------------------+
   |      A highter level system        |
   |(e.g e2e network slice orchestrator)|
   +------------------------------------+
                     A
                     | TSC NBI
                     V
   +------------------------------------+     +-----+
   |      Transport Slice Controller    | ==> | CNC |
   +------------------------------------+     +-----+
                     A                           A
                     | TSC SBI                   | CMI
                     V                           V
   +------------------------------------+     +-----+
   |        Network Controller(s)       | ==> |MDSC |
   +------------------------------------+     +-----+
                                                 A
                                                 | MPI
                                                 V
                                              +-----+
                                              | PNC |
                                              +-----+

   As per [I-D.nsdt-teas-transport-slice-definition] (to be replaced by
   draft-rokui-teas-transport-slice-definition) TSC NBI carries the
   generic transport slice requirements which is realized via the TSC
   SBI.

   As per [RFC8453] and [I-D.ietf-teas-actn-yang], the CNC-MDSC
   Interface (CMI) is used to convey the virtual network service
   requirements along with the service models and the MDSC-PNC Interface
   (MPI) is used to realize the service along network configuration
   models.  [I-D.ietf-teas-te-service-mapping-yang] further describe how
   the VPN services can be mapped to the underlying TE resources.

   The Network Controller in [I-D.nsdt-teas-transport-slice-definition]
   (to be replaced by draft-rokui-teas-transport-slice-definition) is
   depicted as a single block, where as in ACTN framework this has been
   decomposed into MDSC and PNC to handle multiple domains and various
   underlay technologies.





Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   [RFC8453] also describe TE Network Slicing in the context of ACTN as
   a collection of resources that is used to establish a logically
   dedicated virtual network over one or more TE networks.  In case of
   TE enabled underlying network, ACTN VN can be used as a base to
   realize the transport network slicing by coordination among multiple
   peer domains as well as underlay technology domains.

3.4.  Mapping

   The main task of the transport slice controller is to map abstract
   transport slice requirements to concrete technologies and establish
   the required connectivity, and ensuring that required resources are
   allocated to the transport slice.

3.5.  Underlying technology

   There are a number of different technologies that can be used,
   including physical connections, MPLS, TSN, Flex-E, etc.

   See [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn] - section 4 - for instance, for
   example underlying technologies.

   <Note: do we want to add to the list of candidate technolgies in the
   enhanced VPN draft?  It should not be the intention that this
   document should provide an exhaustive list.>

   A transport slice can be realized in a network, using specific
   underlying technology or technologies.  The creation of a new
   transport slice will be initiated with following three steps:

   o  Step 1: A higher level system requests connections with specific
      characteristics via NBI.

   o  Step 2: This request will be processed by a Transport Slice
      Controller which specifies a mapping between northbound request to
      any IETF Services, Tunnels, and paths models.

   o  Step 3: A series of requests for creation of services, tunnels and
      paths will be sent to the network to realize the trasport slice.

   It is very clear that regardless of how transport slice is realized
   in the network (i.e. using tunnels of type RSVP or SR), the
   definition of transport slice does not change at all but rather its
   realization.







Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


4.  Considerations

4.1.  Monitoring

   Transport slice realization needs to be instrumented in order to
   track how it is working, and it might be necessary to modify the
   transport slice as requirements change.  Dynamic reconfiguration
   might be needed.

4.2.  Security Considerations

   Transport slices might use underlying virtualized networking.  All
   types of virtual networking require special consideration to be given
   to the separation of traffic between distinct virtual networks, as
   well as some degree of protection from effects of traffic use of
   underlying network (and other) resources from other virtual networks
   sharing those resources.

   For example, if a service requires a specific latency, then that
   service can be degraded by added delay in transmission of service
   packetws through the activities of another service or application
   using the same resources.

   Similarly, in a network with virtual functions, noticeably impeding
   access to a function used by another transport slice (for instance,
   compute resources) can be just as service degrading as delaying
   physical transmission of associated packet in the network.

   While a transport slice might include encryption and other security
   features as part of the service, consumers might be well advised to
   take responsibility for their own security needs, possibly by
   encrypting traffic before hand-off to a service provider.

4.3.  Privacy Considerations

   Privacy of transport nework slice service consumers must be
   preserved.  It should not be possible for one transport slice
   consumer to discover the presence of other consumers, nor should
   sites that are members of one transport slice be visible outside the
   context of that transport slice.

   In this sense, it is of paramount importance that the system use the
   privacy protection mechanism defined for the specific underlying
   technologies used, including in particular those mechanisms designed
   to preclude acquiring identifying information associated with any
   transport slice consumer.





Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


5.  Acknowledgments

   The entire TEAS NS design team and everyone participating in those
   discussion has contributed to this draft.  Some text fragments in the
   draft have been copied from the [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn], for
   which we are grateful.

6.  Informative References

   [BBF-SD406]
              Broadband Forum, ., "End-to-end network slicing", BBF
              SD-406 , n.d..

   [I-D.ietf-teas-actn-yang]
              Lee, Y., Zheng, H., Ceccarelli, D., Yoon, B., Dios, O.,
              Shin, J., and S. Belotti, "Applicability of YANG models
              for Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineered
              Networks", draft-ietf-teas-actn-yang-05 (work in
              progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn]
              Dong, J., Bryant, S., Li, Z., Miyasaka, T., and Y. Lee, "A
              Framework for Enhanced Virtual Private Networks (VPN+)
              Services", draft-ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn-05 (work in
              progress), February 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-teas-te-service-mapping-yang]
              Lee, Y., Dhody, D., Fioccola, G., WU, Q., Ceccarelli, D.,
              and J. Tantsura, "Traffic Engineering (TE) and Service
              Mapping Yang Model", draft-ietf-teas-te-service-mapping-
              yang-02 (work in progress), September 2019.

   [I-D.nsdt-teas-transport-slice-definition]
              Rokui, R., Homma, S., and K. Makhijani, "IETF Definition
              of Transport Slice", draft-nsdt-teas-transport-slice-
              definition-00 (work in progress), November 2019.

   [NGMN-NS-Concept]
              NGMN Alliance, ., "Description of Network Slicing
              Concept", https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/
              media/161010_NGMN_Network_Slicing_framework_v1.0.8.pdf ,
              2016.

   [RFC7149]  Boucadair, M. and C. Jacquenet, "Software-Defined
              Networking: A Perspective from within a Service Provider
              Environment", RFC 7149, DOI 10.17487/RFC7149, March 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7149>.




Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Transport Network Slice Framework      February 2020


   [RFC8172]  Morton, A., "Considerations for Benchmarking Virtual
              Network Functions and Their Infrastructure", RFC 8172,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8172, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8172>.

   [RFC8453]  Ceccarelli, D., Ed. and Y. Lee, Ed., "Framework for
              Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN)", RFC 8453,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8453, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8453>.

   [RFC8568]  Bernardos, CJ., Rahman, A., Zuniga, JC., Contreras, LM.,
              Aranda, P., and P. Lynch, "Network Virtualization Research
              Challenges", RFC 8568, DOI 10.17487/RFC8568, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8568>.

   [TS23501]  3GPP, ., "System architecture for the 5G System (5GS)",
              3GPP TS 23.501 , 2019.

   [TS28530]  3GPP, ., "Management and orchestration; Concepts, use
              cases and requirements", 3GPP TS 28.530 , 2019.

Authors' Addresses

   Eric Gray
   Ericsson

   Email: eric.gray@ericsson.com


   John Drake
   Juniper Networks

   Email: jdrake@juniper.net


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net












Gray, et al.             Expires August 23, 2020               [Page 11]
